---
class: case
title: Pierson v Post
short: Pierson
reporter: (1805) 3 Caines 175 
year: 1805
doctrines: 
  - possession
published: true
bookHidden: true
weight: 40
description: A fox hunt
---

### Tompkins, J. (majority) -- 

This cause comes before us on a return to a *certiorari* directed to one
of the justices of *Queens* county.  
  
The question submitted by the counsel in this cause for our
determination is, whether *Lodowick Post,* by the pursuit with his
hounds in the manner alleged in his declaration, acquired such a right
to, or property in, the fox, as will sustain an action against *Pierson*
for killing and taking him away?  
  
The cause was argued with much ability by the counsel on both sides, and
presents for our decision a novel and nice question. It is admitted that
a fox is an animal *feræ naturæ,* and that property in such animals is
acquired by occupancy only. These admissions narrow the discussion to
the simple question of what acts amount to occupancy, applied to
acquiring right to wild animals?  
  
If we have recourse to the ancient writers upon general principles of
law, the judgment below is obviously erroneous. *Justinian\'s
Institutes,* lib. 2. tit. 1. s. 13. and *Fleta,* lib. 3. c. 2. p. 175.
adopt the principle, that pursuit alone vests no property or right in
the huntsman; and that even pursuit, accompanied with wounding, is
equally ineffectual for that purpose, unless the animal be actually
taken. The same principle is recognised by *Bracton,* lib. 2. c. 1. p.
8.  
  
*Puffendorf,* lib. 4. c. 6. s. 2. and 10. defines occupancy of beasts
*feræ naturæ,* to be the actual corporal possession of them, and
*Bynkershoek* is cited as coinciding in this definition. It is indeed
with hesitation that *Puffendorf* affirms that a wild beast mortally
wounded, or greatly maimed, cannot be fairly intercepted by another,
whilst the pursuit of the person inflicting the wound
continues. The foregoing authorities are decisive to show that mere
pursuit gave *Post* no legal right to the fox, but that he became the
property of *Pierson,* who intercepted and killed him.  
  
It therefore only remains to inquire whether there are any contrary
principles, or authorities, to be found in other books, which ought to
induce a different decision. Most of the cases which have occurred in
*England,* relating to property in wild animals, have either been
discussed and decided upon the principles of their positive statute
regulations, or have arisen between the huntsman and the owner of the
land upon which beasts *feræ naturæ* have been apprehended; the former
claiming them by title of occupancy, and the latter *ratione soli.*
Little satisfactory aid can, therefore, be derived from the *English*
reporters.  
  
*Barbeyrac,* in his notes on *Puffendorf,* does not accede to the
definition of occupancy by the latter, but, on the contrary, affirms,
that actual bodily seizure is not, in all cases, necessary to constitute
possession of wild animals. He does not, however, *describe* the acts
which, according to his ideas, will amount to an appropriation of such
animals to private use, so as to exclude the claims of all other
persons, by title of occupancy, to the same animals; and he is far from
averring that pursuit alone is sufficient for that purpose. To a certain
extent, and as far as *Barbeyrac* appears to me to go, his objections to
*Puffendorf\'s* definition of occupancy are reasonable and correct. That
is to say, that actual bodily seizure is not indispensable to acquire
right to, or possession of, wild beasts; but that, on the contrary, the
mortal wounding of such beasts, by one not abandoning his pursuit, may,
with the utmost propriety, be deemed possession of him; since, thereby,
the pursuer manifests an unequivocal intention of appropriating the
animal to his individual use, has deprived him of his natural liberty,
and brought him within his certain control. So also, encompassing and
securing such animals with nets and toils, or otherwise intercepting
them in such a manner as to deprive them of their natural liberty, and
render escape impossible, may justly be deemed to give possession of
them to those persons who, by their industry and labour, have used such
means of apprehending them. *Barbeyrac* seems to have adopted, and had
in view in his notes, the more accurate opinion of *Grotius,*
with respect to occupancy. That celebrated author, lib. 2. c. 8. s. 3.
p. 309. speaking of occupancy, proceeds thus: \"*Requiritur autem
corporalis quædam possessio ad dominium adipiscendum; atque ideo,
vulnerasse non sufficit.*\" But in the following section he explains and
qualifies this definition of occupancy: \"*Sed possessio illa potest non
solis manibus, sed instrumentis, ut decipulis, retibus, laqueis dum duo
adsint: primum ut ipsa instrumenta sint in nostra potestate, deinde ut
fera, ita inclusa sit, ut exire inde nequeat.*\" This qualification
embraces the full extent of *Barbeyrac\'s* objection to *Puffendorf\'s*
definition, and allows as great a latitude to acquiring property by
occupancy, as can reasonably be inferred from the words or ideas
expressed by *Barbeyrac* in his notes. The case now under consideration
is one of mere pursuit, and presents no circumstances or acts which can
bring it within the definition of occupancy by *Puffendorf,* or
*Grotius,* or the ideas of *Barbeyrac* upon that subject.  
  
The case cited from 11 *Mod.* 74---130. I think clearly distinguishable
from the present; inasmuch as there the action was for maliciously
hindering and disturbing the plaintiff in the exercise and enjoyment of
a private franchise; and in the report of the same case, 3 *Salk.* 9.
*Holt,* Ch. J. states, that the ducks were in the plaintiff\'s decoy
pond, and *so in his possession,* from which it is obvious the court
laid much stress in their opinion upon the plaintiff\'s possession of
the ducks, *ratione soli.*  
  
We are the more readily inclined to confine possession or occupancy of
beasts *feræ naturæ,* within the limits prescribed by the learned
authors above cited, for the sake of certainty, and preserving peace and
order in society. If the first seeing, starting, or pursuing such
animals, without having so wounded, circumvented or ensnared them, so as
to deprive them of their natural liberty, and subject them to the
control of their pursuer, should afford the basis of actions against
others for intercepting and killing them, it would prove a fertile
source of quarrels and litigation.  
  
However uncourteous or unkind the conduct of *Pierson* towards *Post,*
in this instance, may have been, yet his act was productive of no injury
or damage for which a legal remedy can be applied. We are of
opinion the judgment below was erroneous, and ought to be reversed.  

### Livingston J. --

My opinion differs from that of the court.  

Of six exceptions, taken to the proceedings below, all are abandoned
except the third, which reduces the controversy to a single question.  
  
Whether a person who, with his own hounds, starts and hunts a fox on
waste and uninhabited ground, and is on the point of seizing his prey,
acquires such an interest in the animal, as to have a right of action
against another, who in view of the huntsman and his dogs in full
pursuit, and with knowledge of the chase, shall kill and carry him
away?  
  
This is a knotty point, and should have been submitted to the
arbitration of sportsmen, without poring over *Justinian, Fleta,
Bracton, Puffendorf, Locke, Barbeyrac,* or *Blackstone,* all of whom
have been cited; they would have had no difficulty in coming to a prompt
and correct conclusion. In a court thus constituted, the skin and
carcass of poor *reynard* would have been properly disposed of, and a
precedent set, interfering with no usage or custom which the experience
of ages has sanctioned, and which must be so well known to every votary
of *Diana.* But the parties have referred the question to our judgment,
and we must dispose of it as well as we can, from the partial lights we
possess, leaving to a higher tribunal, the correction of any mistake
which we may be so unfortunate as to make. By the pleadings it is
admitted that a fox is a \"wild and noxious beast.\" Both parties have
regarded him, as the law of nations does a pirate, \"*hostem humani
generis,*\" and although \"*de mortuis nil nisi bonum,*\" be a maxim of
our profession, the memory of the deceased has not been spared. His
depredations on farmers and on barn yards, have not been forgotten; and
to put him to death wherever found, is allowed to be meritorious, and of
public benefit. Hence it follows, that our decision should have in view
the greatest possible encouragement to the destruction of an animal, so
cunning and ruthless in his career. But who would keep a pack of hounds;
or what gentleman, at the sound of the horn, and at peep of day, would
mount his steed, and for hours together, \"*sub jove
frigido,*\" or a vertical sun, pursue the windings of this wily
quadruped, if, just as night came on, and his stratagems and strength
were nearly exhausted, a saucy intruder, who had not shared in the
honours or labours of the chase, were permitted to come in at the death,
and bear away in triumph the object of pursuit? Whatever *Justinian* may
have thought of the matter, it must be recollected that his code was
compiled many hundred years ago, and it would be very hard indeed, at
the distance of so many centuries, not to have a right to establish a
rule for ourselves. In his day, we read of no order of men who made it a
business, in the language of the declaration in this cause, \"with
hounds and dogs to find, start, pursue, hunt, and chase,\" these
animals, and that, too, without any other motive than the preservation
of *Roman* poultry; if this diversion had been then in fashion, the
lawyers who composed his institutes, would have taken care not to pass
it by, without suitable encouragement. If any thing, therefore, in the
digests or pandects shall appear to militate against the defendant in
error, who, on this occasion, was the foxhunter, we have only to say
*tempora mutantur;* and if men themselves change with the times, why
should not laws also undergo an alteration?  
  
It may be expected, however, by the learned counsel, that more
particular notice be taken of their authorities. I have examined them
all, and feel great difficulty in determining, whether to acquire
dominion over a thing, before in common, it be sufficient that we barely
see it, or know where it is, or wish for it, or make a declaration of
our will respecting it; or whether, in the case of wild beasts, setting
a trap, or lying in wait, or starting, or pursuing, be enough; or if an
actual wounding, or killing, or bodily tact and occupation be necessary.
Writers on general law, who have favoured us with their speculations on
these points, differ on them all; but, great as is the diversity of
sentiment among them, some conclusion must be adopted on the question
immediately before us. After mature deliberation, I embrace that of
*Barbeyrac,* as the most rational, and least liable to objection. If at
liberty, we might imitate the courtesy of a certain emperor, who, to
avoid giving offence to the advocates of any of these
different doctrines, adopted a middle course, and by ingenious
distinctions, rendered it difficult to say (as often happens after a
fierce and angry contest) to whom the palm of victory belonged. He
ordained, that if a beast be followed with *large dogs and hounds,* he
shall belong to the hunter, not to the chance occupant; and in like
manner, if he be killed or wounded with a lance or sword; but if chased
with *beagles only,* then he passed to the captor, not to the first
pursuer. If slain with a dart, a sling, or a bow, he fell to the hunter,
if still in chase, and not to him who might afterwards find and seize
him.  
  
Now, as we are without any municipal regulations of our own, and the
pursuit here, for aught that appears on the case, being with dogs and
hounds of *imperial stature,* we are at liberty to adopt one of the
provisions just cited, which comports also with the learned conclusion
of *Barbeyrac,* that property in animals *feræ naturæ* may be acquired
without bodily touch or manucaption, provided the pursuer be within
reach, or have a *reasonable* prospect (which certainly existed here) of
taking, what he has *thus* discovered an intention of converting to his
own use.  
  
When we reflect also that the interest of our husbandmen, the most
useful of men in any community, will be advanced by the destruction of a
beast so pernicious and incorrigible, we cannot greatly err, in saying,
that a pursuit like the present, through waste and unoccupied lands, and
which must inevitably and speedily have terminated in corporal
possession, or bodily *seisin,* confers such a right to the object of
it, as to make any one a wrongdoer, who shall interfere and shoulder the
spoil. The *justice\'s* judgment ought, therefore, in my opinion, to be
affirmed.  
  
Judgment of reversal.  