---
class: case
style: Belfast Corporation v OD Cars, LTD
short: Belfast
reporter: [1960] 2 WLR 148, [1960] 1 All ER 65
year: 1959
facts: OD Cars requested permission from Belfast to build commercial and industrial facilities on their land. Belfast denied permission because of the height and character of the buildings, along with the residential zoning of the area. 
issue: Whether this constituted a taking for which OD Cars is owed compensation.
held: Failing to grant a permit because of reasonable statutory restrictions does not amount to a taking of property. The zoning bylaw here was reasonable, so no compensation was owed.
public: true
tags:
  - use
  - defacto-expropriation
  - land-use-regulation
---


### Viscount Simonds --

 My Lords, the facts in this case, which give rise to some difficult questions, can be shortly stated. The respondents, a limited company registered in Belfast, own in fee farm certain land at Alexandra Park, Belfast. On buildings erected on that land, they have for many years carried on the business of garage proprietors and general motor engineers. On Feb. 9, 1954, they made an application to the appellants. the Belfast Corporation, for permission to erect on the land further industrial and commercial premises, viz., lock-up shops on Antrim Road and factories or warehouses on the back portion. The application was made pursuant to the provisions of s. 2 of the Planning (Interim Development) Act (Northern Ireland), 1944, to the appellants as the interim development authority. Such an application is known as an interim development application. I will refer later to this Act. On Mar. 2, 1954, the appellants refused the application on the ground (a) as to the lock-up shops, that the height and character of the proposed development would not be in accordance with their requirements for the site, namely, development to be in shops with dwellings over minimum height twenty-five feet, and (b) as to the industrial or commercial use of remainder of site, that the site was zoned as residential and that the character and user of the proposed development would be incompatible with such zoning. This refusal led to a claim for compensation for injurious affection under the Act which, in accordance with its provisions, was referred to the official arbitrator appointed thereunder. Before I narrate the proceedings which led to this appeal, I must refer to the relevant statutory provisions of the Planning and Housing Act (Northern Ireland), 1931, and the Planning (Interim Development) Act (Northern Ireland), 1944, which I will call the Act of 1931 and the Act of 1944. The former Act, after providing for the making of planning schemes to be prepared and adopted by local authorities and to be approved by the Minister and sundry other relevant matters, by s. 9 (1) enacted that any person whose property is injuriously affected by the coming into operation of a planning scheme shall, if he makes a claim for the purpose within the time therein mentioned, be entitled to obtain compensation in respect thereof from the responsible authority. But this right is subject to the limitation contained in s. 10, which provides, by sub-s. (1), that where property is alleged to be injuriously affected by reason of any provisions contained in a planning scheme, no compensation shall be paid in respect thereof if or so far as the provisions are also contained in any public, general or local Act in force in the area or otherwise as therein mentioned and, by sub-s. (2) (which is the subsection relevant to this appeal and must be set out verbatim), as follows:

> Property shall not be deemed to be injuriously affected by reason of the coming into operation of any provisions inserted in a planning scheme, which prescribe the space about buildings or limit the number of buildings to be erected, or prescribe the height or character or user of buildings, or prescribe a standard of net annual value for buildings, and which the Ministry, having regard to the nature and situation of the land affected by the provisions, considers reasonable for the purpose:

Development under the Act of 1931 made slow progress and was in due course supplemented by the Act of 1944. Section 1 (1) of that Act deems all land which was not the subject of a planning scheme under the earlier Act, or of a resolution to prepare and adopt such a scheme, to be subject to a resolution to prepare a planning scheme under the Act. Section 2 directs the Ministry to make a general interim development order with respect to land to which such a resolution applies, and provides that such an order may empower any local authority specified therein to permit the development of land in accordance with the provisions thereof. In accordance with the duty thus placed on it, the Ministry, on July 10, 1944, made the Planning (General Interim Development) Order (Northern Ireland), 1944 (S.R. & O. 1944 No. 58), which empowered F the appellants to grant permission for the development of land within the county borough of Belfast. I need refer no more to the Act of 1944 except to set out the section, i.e., s. 6, under which, as I have already said, the respondents made the claim for compensation now under review. That section provided, by sub-s. (4), so far as material, as follows:

> Where ... an interim development application is refused ... then, the applicant ... shall, if he makes a claim for the purpose be entitled to obtain from the local authority such compensation in respect of any injurious affection of his property by reason of the aforesaid decision as he would be entitled to obtain under the principal Act [the Act of 1931] if such injurious affection had been suffered as a consequence of the coming into operation of a planning scheme...

The claim for compensation having been made and refused on the grounds that I have stated, a number of questions were raised before the arbitrator which led him without proceeding to an award to state a consultative case for the opinion of the court in which he posed two questions as follows:

"(i) Whether I am entitled to award compensation to the claimant for injurious affection of the said land."

"(ii) Whether the evidence of Mr. A. P. Fitzgerald is suffcient to satisfy the requirements of s. 10 (2) of the Planning and Housing Act (Northern Ireland), 1931."

The second question must appear at the present stage of my narrative somewhat cryptic. It is, in my opinion, of a formal character, and I will defer consideration of it until I have disposed of the important matters that arise under the first question. These are, first, a question arising on the construction of the Act of 1944, viz., whether s. 6 (4) of that Act incorporates a reference to s. 10 (2) of the Act of 1831 as well as to the compensatory provisions of s. 9, and, secondly, whether s. 10(2) is a valid enactment having regard to the provisions of s. 5 of the Government of Ireland Act, 1920. The far-reaching importance of the second question is obvious.

My Lords, on the first of these questions I entertain no doubt, and I cannot state the answer to it in a manner more clear and comprehensive than the learned Lord Chief Justice (Lord MacDermott) has done. Section 6 (4) of the later Act does incorporate s. 10 (2) of the earlier Act. I will not occupy your Lordships' time by further reference to it.

On the second question, viz., the constitutional validity of s. 10 (2) of the Act of 1931, I must say something more. For, though I agree with much that the Lord Chief Justice has said on this topic, there comes a point at which I must with great respect diverge from him. The issue turns on the true meaning and effect of s. 5 of the Government of Ireland Act, 1920. Subsection (1) of that section is as follows:

> In the exercise of their power to make laws under this Act neither the Parliament of Southern Ireland nor the Parliament of Northern Ireland shall make a law so as either directly or indirectly to establish or endow any religion, or prohibit or restrict the free exercise thereof, or give a preference, privilege, or advantage, or impose any disability or disadvantage, on account of religious belief or religious or ecclesiastical status, or make any religious belief or religious ceremony a condition of the validity of any marriage, or affect prejudicially the right of any child to attend a school receiving public money without attending the religious instruction at that school, or alter the constitution of any religious body except where the alteration is approved on behalf of the religious body by the governing body thereof, or divert from any religious denomination the fabric of cathedral churches, or, except for the purpose of roads, railways, lighting. water, or drainage works, or other works of public utility upon payment of compensation, any other property, or take any property without compensation.

> Any law made in contravention of the restrictions imposed by this subsection shall, so far as it contravenes those restrictions, be void.

It was first urged on behalf of the appellants that the last five words of the first paragraph of this subsection referred only to the property of religious bodies or institutions. This point was decided against them twenty years ago in *O'Neill v. Northern Ireland Road Transport Board*, and I do not doubt that that case was rightly decided. An argument founded on the historical genesis of these words, which was in any case of little weight, could not prevail against their plain meaning. Next, I must refer to an argument (though I am not clear which side could be assisted by it) that the words "either directly or indirectly " do not govern the last five words. But grammatically they clearly do, and I see no reason for not allowing grammatical laws to prevail. In any view, it is of no importance to this case.

I come then to the substantial questions: What is the meaning of the word "take"? What is the meaning of the word "property"? What is the scope of the phrase "take any property without compensation"? My Lords, I would declare my indebtedness not only to the counsel for the parties but also to the Attorney-General for Northern Ireland and those assisting him for the help that they have given the House in the consideration of these questions. With their aid, your Lordships have explored the federal constitutions of the United States of America, of Canada and of Australia in which are to be found words similar, but, perhaps, not very similar, to the words now under review. But, my Lords, I doubt whether at the end of that journey the path is brightlyilluminated. I should like, however, before I venture on it, to consider for a moment the simple language of the Constitutional Act with which we are concerned. I hope that I do not over-simplify the problem, if I ask whether anyone using the English language in its ordinary signification would say of a local authority which imposed some restriction on the user of property by its owner that that authority had "taken " that owner's " property". He would not make any fine distinction between "take", "take over " or "take away" He would agree that "property" is a word of very wide import, including intangible and tangible property. But he would surely deny that any one of those rights, which in the aggregate constitute ownership of property, could itself and by itself aptly be called "property" and, to come to the instant case, he would deny that the right to use property in a particular way was itself property and that the restriction or denial of that right by a local authority was a "taking", "taking away " or "taking over " of "property."

I do not seek to qualify in any way what has been said in such cases as *Central Control Board (Liquor Traffic) v. Cannon Brewery Co., Ltd.* I have no right to do so. It is no doubt the law that the intention to take away property without compensation is not to be imputed to the legislature unless it is expressed in unequivocal terms. But this principle, on which learned counsel for the respondents so vigorously insisted, seems to me to have no bearing on the question what is the meaning of the phrase "take property without compensation" in a constitutional instrument such as the Government of Ireland Act. If, indeed, I must have recourse to any broad principle of law for the construction of these few simple words, I should remind myself that from the earliest times the owner of property, and in particular of land, has been restricted in his free enjoyment of it not only by the common law maxim sic utere tuo ut alienum non laedas, but by positive enactments limiting his user or even imposing burdens on him. I do not, therefore, approach this question of construction with any predisposition to enlarge the scope of the vital words. For, my Lords, I would here point out that, if such restrictions as the Acts of 1931 and 1944 impose cannot be enforced without the payment of compensation, the practical effect must be to deprive the Parliament of Northern Ireland of the power to legislate not only in this particular field in a manner recognised as necessary to its proper fulfilment in Great Britain but in numerous other fields also in which it has been widely realised that the rights of the individual must be subordinate to the general interest. Learned counsel for the respondents were constrained to admit that their success in this argument might lead to the invalidation of numerous Acts whose validity has been hitherto unchallenged. It would not be easy to reconcile this result with the power accorded to the Parliament by s. 4 of the Act to make laws for the peace, order and good government of Northern Ireland. It is right, however, that, in the interpretation of constitutional instruments, guidance should be sought from those courts whose constant duty it has been to construe similar instruments, if only because, as it appears to me, a flexibility of construction is admissible in regard to such instruments which might be rejected in construing ordinary statutes or inter partes documents. The courts of Northern Ireland have not hesitated to adopt this course and have found assistance in their task of construing their own constitution from the manner in which great judges among the English-speaking peoples overseas have dealt with kindred problems. I do not think that any better examples can be found than in the passages cited by the Lord Chief Justice from the judgments of Holmes, J., and Brandeis, J. Thus, when Brandeis, J., says in the passage quoted by the Lord Chief Justice from his judgment in *Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon*:

> Every restriction upon the use of property imposed in the exercise of the police power deprives the owner of some right theretofore enjoyed, and is, in that sense, an abridgment by the state of rights in property without making compensation. But restriction imposed to protect the public health, safety or morals from dangers threatened is not a taking. The restriction here in question is merely the prohibition of a noxious use,

that very learned judge indicates in clear terms the distinction which should guide us in determining whether or not legislation which diminishes the owner's free enjoyment of his own property is a "taking" of that property. It is clear that such a diminution of rights can be effected without a cry being raised that Magna Carta is dethroned or a sacred principle of liberty infringed. I will say only one thing more about the American cases. The day may come when it will be necessary to consider the relevance to the constitution of Northern Ireland of the observation of Holmes, J., in the case already cited:

> The general rule at least is, that while property may be regulated to a certain extent, if regulation goes too far it will be recognised as a taking.

If the question is one of degree, I am clearly of opinion that the day did not arrive with s. 10 (2) of the Act of 1931.

My Lords, the distinction drawn between "regulating" and "taking" or "regulatory" and "confiscatory" will at once bring to mind the controversy to which placitum (xxxi) of s. 51 of the Australian Constitution has given rise. On decisions of the High Court of Australia on this placitum the respondents strongly relied. At one stage, learned counsel said he was prepared to rest his case on *Minister of State for the Army v. Dalziel*, the facts in which case were widely different from those we have now to consider. No doubt the language there under review "the acquisition of property on just terms " was not dissimilar to that in our constitutional Act, and these words have led to much the E same controversy as have the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments in the United States of America. Nor do I doubt that the same considerations are relevant to the determination of their meaning. Nor would I cast the least doubt on the decision in *Dalziel's* case or anything that was said by the learned judges who decided it. But, having said so much and fully recognising the distinction that may exist between measures that are regulatory and measures that are confiscatory, and that a measure which is ex facie regulatory may in substance be confiscatory, I must add that if, as I suppose it is, the question is one of degree and the dividing line is difficult to draw, yet I have no doubt that such an enactment as the Act of 1931 and, in particular, s. 10 (2) falls well on the regulatory side of it. The respondents get no help from Australia.

I have used the expression "in substance confiscatory " and that takes me to Canada. In the consideration of the constitutional validity of legislation of the Federal or (as the case might be) of Provincial Parliaments the expression "pith and substance " came to be commonly used in order to determine whether an enactment was truly within the legislative power of the one Parliament or the other under the British North America Act. It is an expression that has had its uses, not only in Canada see *Gallagher v. Lynn*, but I think that it can give little assistance to your Lordships in considering the meaning of our five words, to which I now return. For there is one aspect of the case which deserves particular attention, since, by it, the Lord Chief Justice was influenced to consider the section invalid. Having held (and, as I think, rightly held) that much that is entirely reasonable may be done under the powers conferred by s. 10 (2) and that those powers are capable of being exercised reasonably, the learned judge says: 

> But, if such powers are capable of being exercised reasonably it is impossible to say that they may not also be exercised unreasonably.

And after giving examples of unreasonable exercise he concludes:

> If, then, a planning authority exercises any of the powers to which s. 10 (2) relates in a manner which fails to satisfy what I have called the second test by being unreasonable and thereby causes loss or damage which constitutes a taking and to meet which no right to compensation is available, there will, in my opinion, be a breach of s. 5 (1) [i.e. of the Government of Ireland Act, 1920].

My Lords, it appears to me that the short answer to this contention (and I hope that its shortness will not be regarded as disrespect) is that the validity of a measure is not to be determined by its application to particular cases. It is not for the "planning authority " but for the Ministry to determine whether a proposed exercise of the powers is reasonable. That is an administrative duty, to be exercised not arbitrarily but for the purposes of the Act. If it is not so exercised, it is open to challenge and there is no need for express provision for its challenge in the statute. If I understand the learned Lord Chief Justice, he would not consider the section invalid if the duty of deciding on the reasonableness of the exercise of a power was given not to the Ministry but to the judiciary. But I find it difficult to suppose it to be the purpose or theory of any constitution that a purely administrative function of this character should be given to the judiciary rather than to the executive. Matters of policy which are determined by the government and carried out in detail by the aid of an experienced administrative staff cannot be confided to the judiciary. Their function begins if and when for any reason administrative action lays itself open to challenge. The measure itself is not open to such challenge unless it is plainly and on the face of it within the prohibition. That condition is not satisfied merely because the powers it confers on the executive may be exercised unreasonably. I am, therefore, of opinion that the ground on which specifically the Lord Chief Justice held the section tobe invalid was not sound.

I would answer the first question posed by the arbitrator: No, provided that the arbitrator is satisfied by proper evidence that the Ministry considers the provisions reasonable.

I must now turn to the second question on which the arbitrator asked the opinion of the court, viz., whether the evidence of Mr. A. P. Fitzgerald was sufficient to satisfy the requirements of the relevant section, i.e., that "the Ministry, having regard to the nature and character of the land affected by the provisions, considers reasonable for the purpose" the provisions inserted in the planning scheme to which the subsection refers. The relevant facts appear to be that a Mr. Ronald Green, Assistant Secretary to the Ministry of Health and Local Government, by letter of Jan. 3, 1955, told the solicitor of the appellants that Mr. A. P. Fitzgerald would attend the hearing of the claim before the arbitrator and would be prepared to state that

> the decision on the application of [the respondents], made by the [appellants] . . . was reasonable and was based on considerations which, if included in a scheme formulated under the above-mentioned Acts, would be approved by the Ministry.

Mr. Fitzgerald duly attended the hearing. He proved that he was authorised by the Ministry to give evidence on its behalf, that he had no personal knowledge of the facts of the case, that he was not present at discussions which he said had taken place in the Ministry with regard to the matter, but that he was authorised by the Ministry to state, and did state, that, as a result of such discussions, the Ministry considered that the decision of the appellants on the application of the respondents was reasonable and was based on considerations which, if included in a scheme formulated under the relevant Acts, would be approved by the Ministry. The question is whether this evidence satisfied the statutory requirement. I think that there are really two questions here, one of substance, the other of form. On the question of substance, I find no legitimate ground of criticism. It appears to me that, since s. 6 (4) of the Act of 1944 is designed to meet precisely the case where no planning scheme has yet been prepared and submitted for approval, the Ministry satisfies the conditions of s. 10 (2) of the earlier Act if it considers provisions to be reasonable which it would consider reasonable having regard to the nature and situation of the land thereby affected if a scheme had been made embracing that land. It is not possible to be more specific than the situation envisaged by the later Act admits. The question of form, however, remains. In a matter of this importance, strict adherence to form is requisite.

It is not to my mind satisfactory that, if oral evidence is necessary, it should be given by a witness who, admittedly knowing nothing about it, speaks on instructions. I should, therefore, without meaning any disrespect to Mr. Fitzgerald, say that his evidence should be disregarded. But this does not end the matter. I do not think that it was necessary or indeed proper for the appellants to prove that the Ministry thought the provisions in question reasonable by the introduction of an officer of the Ministry to give oral evidence. It is not a matter for cross-examination of this or that official of the Ministry or of the Minister himself. Nevertheless, the statutory fact must be strictly proved and it appears to me that the proper course is that a certificate should be issued to the required effect under the Minister's seal and duly authenticated. Such a certificate when tendered would prove itself under s. 3 (1) of the Ministries of Northern Ireland Act, 1921.

I answer the second question posed by the arbitrator in the negative. With these answers, the case will go back to him for his further determination and answer.

My noble and learned friend, Lord Cohen, who is unable to be here this morning has asked me to say that he concurs in the opinion that I have just given, and with that which my noble and learned friend, Lord Radcliffe, will shortly give.

### Lord Radcliffe --

My Lords, I am in full agreement with what has been said by my noble and learned friend on the Woolsack. That being so, I do not think that it would serve any useful purpose if I travelled again over the same ground. It is no disrespect to the learning and weight of the judgment of the Lord Chief Justice in the Court of Appeal in Northern Ireland if I say that my principal reason for disagreeing with his conclusion is that I do not believe that the present case raises the issues that he has dealt with quite in the form in which he considers them. The fundamental question, as I see it, is whether the prohibition of taking any property without compensation contained in s. 5 (1) of the Government of Ireland Act, 1920, bars the enactment by law of such restrictions on the user or development of property as are referred to in s. 10 (2) of the Planning and Housing Act (Northern Ireland), 1931, unless compensation is provided. In my opinion, it does not, because it seems to me that the word "taking," when used in this context, does not extend to cover the act of imposing restrictions of that kind.

I do not see how you can give a meaning to this phrase, "taking without compensation," except by reference to the general treatment of the subject in the law of England and Ireland before 1920. A survey would, I think, discern two divergent lines of approach. On the one hand, there would be the general principle, accepted by the legislature and scrupulously defended by the courts, that the title to property or the enjoyment of its possession was not to be compulsorily acquired from a subject unless full compensation was afforded in its place. Acquisition of title or possession was "taking." Aspects of this principle are found in the rules of statutory interpretation devised by the courts which required the presence of the most explicit words before an acquisition could be held to be sanctioned by an Act of Parliament without full compensation being provided or imported an intention to give compensation and machinery for assessing it into any Act of Parliament that did not positively exclude it. This vigilance to see that the subject's rights to property were protected, so far as was consistent with the requirements of expropriation of what was previously enjoyed in specie, was regarded as an important guarantee of individual liberty. It would be a mistake to look on it as representing any conflict between the legislature and the courts. The principle was, generally speaking, common to both. Side by side with this, however, and developing with increasing range and authority during the second half of the nineteenth century, came the great movement for the regulation of life in cities and towns in the interests of public health and amenity. It is not an adequate description of the powers involved, so far at any rate as the United Kingdom is concerned, to speak of them as "police powers". They went far beyond that. Their chief sphere was in thedelegated legislation conceded to local authorities, though in some cases they arose from the direct legislation of Parliament itself. Achieved by one means or the other, there is no doubt at all that the effect of them was to impose obligations and restrictions on the owner of town land which impaired his right of development, prohibited or restricted his rights of user and in some cases imposed monetary charges on him or compelled him to expend money on altering his property. Generally speaking, though not without exception, these obligations and restrictions were treated as not requiring compensation, though, of course, in a sense they expropriated certain rights of property. A perusal of the Public Health Act, 1875, will be sufficient to make the point. It shows how extensive interference could be, even at that date. Only in a few special cases is compensation provided for the consequence of interference. No one, so far as I know, spoke of this as a "taking of property " or treated the general principle of "no taking without compensation" as applicable to the case. For instance, bye-laws, which have to be "reasonable," i.e., not manifestly unjust, if the courts are to sustain them, were upheld, even though seriously restricting the user of property without affording any compensation for the restriction (see *Slattery v. Naylor*, a case from Australia).

When town planning legislation came in eo nomine in 1909, the emphasis had, no doubt, shifted from considerations of public health to the wider and more debatable ground of public amenity. It may possibly have been for this reason, I do not know, that the Act of 1909 included a comprehensive, though not exhaustive, "injurious affection" section, the effect of which was to give property owners whose rights were interfered with in the cause of town planning a right to compensation for any damage that they suffered, subject to counterclaims for betterment and certain exclusions. This "injurious affection" embraced an altogether wider category of injury than the "injurious affection" that had been the subject of compensation under the Lands Clauses Consolidation Act, 1845. In fact, as we know, s. 59 (2) of the Housing, Town Planning, etc. Act, 1909 (which did not itself extend to Ireland), excluded compensation for injurious affection in respect of several of the same heads of restriction as those which are found in s. 10 (2) of the Act of 1931 in Northern Ireland. I do not think that this last circumstance has any bearing on the present issue; the Westminster legislature with its full sovereignty might be able to exclude compensation in cases where the Northern Ireland Parliament under its constitutional limitations could not. What is important, I think, is to recognise that, though interference with rights of development and user had come to be a recognised element of the regulation and planning of towns in the interest of public health and amenity, the consequent control, impairment or diminution of those rights was not treated as a "taking" of property nor, when compensation was provided, was it provided on the basis that property or property rights I had been "taken" but on the basis that property, itself retained, had been injuriously affected.

These considerations lead me to the following conclusions: (i) The taking of property referred to in s. 5 (1) of the Government of Ireland Act, 1920, ought not to be treated as applying to the imposition of restrictions on user and development under town-planning powers. (ii) It is within the competence of the Parliament of Northern Ireland to decide on what occasions and to what extent compensation is to be afforded for injury suffered under such restrictions. (iii) Section 10 (2) of the Act of 1931 is, accordingly, a valid enactment.

Viewing the matter from this aspect, I do not think that the requirement that compensation can only be excluded if the Ministry concerned passes the restrictions as reasonable for the purpose raises any relevant issue. If compensation could validly be excluded anyway in such cases, the legislative power cannot have been less validly exercised because the town-planning authority's liberty to exclude compensation has been limited by such a provision. It may be in itself a very salutary limitation; but that is not a matter for the court. It follows, too, that the question whether the provision "ousts the jurisdiction of the court " in any relevant sense a question to which the learned Lord Chief Justice gave much attention in the later passages of his judgment and on which he ultimately founded his decision of the appeal does not, in my opinion, arise. I do not imply by what I have said that I regard it as out of the question that, on a particular occasion, there might not be a restriction of user so extreme that in substance, though not in form, it amounted to a "taking" of the land affected for the benefit of the public. It is not very easy to imagine such a restriction being imposed by a responsible authority or surviving the test of the Ministry's approval, the more so as the Act deals separately with open spaces as a subject of acquisition, not without compensation. But given that such a case might hypothetically occur, the question for us is whether that possibility in itself is sufficient to invalidate s. 10 (2), the natural subject of which is restrictions and not "takings." I do not think that it is. It seems to me the wrong way to treat the constitutional provision. To my mind, it does more justice to its intent if a restriction which is in substance a taking, should one ever occur, is attacked ad hoc as not within the true meaning and scope of s. 10 (2) than that the whole subsection should be thrown on the scrap-heap as constitutionally an outlaw.

The second question raised by the Official Arbitrator's Case Stated relates to formalities only, except so far as it may incidentally throw light on the question whether s. 10 (2) of the Planning and Housing Act (Northern Ireland), 1931, is introduced into interim development by s. 6 (4) of the Planning (Interim Development) Act (Northern Ireland), 1944. The Case Stated is accepted by both sides as a consultative case; therefore, if it is right to conclude that the evidence given by Mr. A. P. Fitzgerald is insufficient to prove the consent of the Ministry of Health and Local Government, the hearing before the arbitrator must be continued and the necessary evidence called for or tendered.

This question of the form of evidence required is not an easy one, but, on the whole, I take the same view as that which has been taken in the Divisional Court and the Court of Appeal in Northern Ireland on this issue, if not for quite the same reasons. What has to be before the tribunal, if effect is to be given to s. 10 (2), is the view or judgment of "the Ministry " that certain planning provisions are reasonable for the purpose. The Ministry itself is an impersonal legal entity and it is only by some use of metaphor that such mental processes as views can be attributed to it. The question is not how they can be or why they have been formed but how they can be proved so that a tribunal can act on them. For this purpose, I do not think that one should look for the Minister himself or some senior official to attend in person so as to satisfy the court by oral testimony that "the Ministry " in fact holds the required opinion. Indeed, I should not regard I cross-examination as open on the issue whether the Ministry should hold such an opinion, given that it declares that it does. The natural and, I think, the proper way to record the view of the Ministry in such a context is to bring into existence a certificate over the Ministry's proper seal, authenticated as the statute requires, and to tender that before the arbitrator. If so tendered, it will prove itself by virtue of s. 3 (1) of the Ministries of Northern Ireland Act, 1921 (N.I.), " unless the contrary is shown."

It was one aspect of the respondents' argument that, until a planning scheme in the proper sense had come into operation, no such Ministry view as that required by s. 10 (2) of the Act of 1931 could be formed or expressed. I do not agree with this, if one once arrives at the conclusion, as I believe that all your Lordships do, that s. 6 (4) of the Act of 1944 necessarily involves the hypothesis that the provisions of s. 10 (2) are adapted to the situation where a projected development has been restricted under interim development control. A certificate given under those conditions in the present case would be to the effect that the Ministry considered that the provisions prescribing height, character and user of buildings and sites, which, by virtue of the Planning Acts (Northern Ireland), 1931 and 1944, and the Planning (General Interim Development) Order (Northern Ireland), 1944, and the refusal by the appellants of the respondents' application to proceed with development had been imposed on the respondents' land, were, having regard to the nature and situation of the land affected, reasonable for the purpose. I do not think that the evidence actually tendered by Mr. Fitzgerald ought to be treated as adequate to prove the Ministry's view. It is true that he was introduced by a letter from Mr. Green, an Assistant Secretary; but the letter itself is neither a certificate nor evidence of the essential fact to be proved, since its purport was to say that the necessary evidence would be afforded by Mr. Fitzgerald when he appeared. What Mr. Fitzgerald said, when he did appear, was to the effect that he had no personal knowledge of the facts of the case and had taken no part in the Ministry's discussions, but was sent to report what the Ministry's view was. No one can be expected to be altogether satisfied with this.

His evidence of the relevant fact is only hearsay, and his own status is reduced to that of a messenger. I do not mean to imply any disrespect to him in the situation in which he was placed, but it seems to me that, if his Ministry does wish to communicate its opinion through a messenger, he ought to be allowed to carry with him a formal warrant of its view over the proper seal.

### Lord Keith of Avenholm --

My Lords, I agree.